
In our books and movies, we were warned about the cyborgs. Told of the day that the cyborgs would magically appear and suddenly rule our lives. Told about mighty struggles against the machines. Told about the ethics we should have in place for when the abstract cyborg uprising came. We were never told, however, about how to know when that day finally occurred.

This project starts with a fundamental assertion: we are cyborgs. Our social reality is grounded on the myth of the cyborg  — a fundamental framework that structures our ontologies and our politics. The term cyborg was first introduced by Manfred E. Clynes and Nathan S. Kline in _Astronautics_ as a suggested move towards fusing humans and machine in the service of space travel: “rather than providing an earthly environment for /man/ in space,” they suggested. But this concept — a society whose basis rests upon the idea of a cyborg — has been taken up by other academics; I first encountered this “image of a cyborg” when reading Donna Haraway’s classic “Cyborg Manifesto.” Haraway’s goal in this text is to build an “ironic political myth faithful to feminism, socialism, and materialism,” and argues that by “our time, a mythic time, we are all chimeras, theorized and fabricated hybrids of machine and organism… we are cyborgs.” 

By this she means simply that the fundamental structures that grounded a sense separation between human and machine have been demolished.  I take a Tylenol and become a cyborg. By using a cellphone to record a fleeting thought, I have become a cyborg. All this seems fanciful and abstract — humans have always been tool-users — but the key point is that it’s no longer terribly clear where the boundaries between the human and the machine are drawn. This is a political move for Harraway, as it is for me:

The cyborg is our ontology; it gives us our politics. The cyborg is a condensed image of both imagination and material reality, the two joined centers structuring nay possibility of historical transformation. In the “traditions of ‘Western’ science and politics — the tradition of the racist, male-dominant capitalism; the tradition of progress; the tradition of the appropriation of nature as resource for the the productions of culture; the tradition of reproduction of the self from the reflections of the other — the relationship between organism and machine has been a border war. The states in the border war have been the territories of production, reproduction, and imagination. 

This notion of humans as cyborgs stands in stark contrast to the pre-cyborg human, the Marshall McLuhanian textual “Gutenberg man.” Text, notes McLuhan, is rigid: it exists within the confines of the text itself. Interpreting text is itself a solitary experience. Unlike oral traditions, it exists outside of community and within the confines of the singular reader: and, often, entirely within their mind. It is also linear: reading a book is a journey from one line to another, in order.  

And it’s not just the printing press that structured modern society in this way. For McLuhan, the phonetic alphabet itself is the foundation of Western civilization:

it can be argued, then, that the phonetic alphabet, alone, is the technology that has been the means of creating ‘civilized man’ - the separate individuals equal before a written code of law… separateness of the individual, continuity of space and of time, and uniformity of codes are the prime marks of literate and civilized societies /// note one this 

For McLuhan, the phonetic alphabet is the technology that “releases” the individual from the communitarian society. To be clear, this “has nothing to do with the content of the alphabetized words; it is a result of the sudden breach between the auditory and the visual experience of man.” The phonetic alphabet is the core of the project of alienation Western society has embarked on since it’s invention: it “diminishes the role of the other senses of sound and touch and taste in any literature culture;” it erodes “a rich store of inclusive perception in depth of experience;” it makes “all situations uniform and continuous;” it “endows men with the means of suppressing their feelings and emotions when engaged in action.”

It even permanently shifted our expressions of consciousness itself. As McLuhan notes:
 
consciousness is not a verbal process… yet during all our centuries of phonetic literacy we have favored the chain of inference as the mark of logic and reason… In Western literate society it is still plausible and acceptable to say that something ‘follows’ from something, as if there were some cause at work that makes such a sequence.” 

These structures, for McLuhan, have eeked their way into our fundamental industrial and technocratic structures of both thought and production:

Only alphabetic cultures have ever mastered connected lineal sequences as pervasive forms of psychic and social organization. The breaking up of every kind of experience into uniform units in order to produce faster action and change of form (applied knowledge) has the been the secret of Western industrial power over many and nature alike.

The process of alienation spearheaded by the development the phonetic alphabet that led to constructing a society in the image of the text was “manifest even in the Graeco-Roman phase” but, of course, “became more intense with the uniformity and repeatability of the Gutenberg development.” That “development,” of course, was perhaps the most critical moment in the history of Western Civilization, and preceded a massive power and political shift from the priestly and militant elite to the newly literate class of merchants and artisans; roughly, what became the “middle class.” The 30-years-war and eventually Enlightenment was a byproduct of the printing press. Before Martin Luther, many people attempted to topple the Catholic Church: but it was only after Gutenberg’s printing press brought the _95 Theses_ to the masses that their essential foothold of political power was disrupted for good, and replaced with the Enlightenment concept of nation-states, grounded in a core political text, and subject to the secular controls of written, accessible legal, code. 

Textual society empowers the individual, but it does so at the expense of communion with others and with nature. Through text, Western society developed the concept of a certain kind of mechanistic control, exploitation, and understanding of nature and each other; text presents the world and its systems as comprehensible, atomistic, linear, mechanical, and manipulable. But we are not living in a social reality grounded by the “Gutenberg man.” We are living in a post-text society: a _hypertext_ society, a society inhabited by cyborgs. Hypertext is extremely fluid. It represents ideas not as atomistic but as inherently related and constantly updated. The system as a whole survives the change or removal of any particular node: continuously operating in a manic dynamic web of connections.

Cyborgs understand the world through hypertext: through the lens of data, code, and the connections between things. They revel in the immediacy, the non-linearity, the chaotic web of the digital world. For example: they understand racism as systematic; they understand gender as a societal construct, not a biological one, and one that is inherently fluid. Contemporary discourses on liberation most often rightly begin with this explicit turn towards intersectionality; contemporary metaphysics and epistemology works within the constructs of phenomenological intersubjectivity. 

For Haraway, cyborgs are not concerned with boundary projects in the same way as the textual human was concerned with them: they exist as a transcendence of the ambiguous “boundary between physical and non-physical;” between material and digital; between nature and science; between human and non-human; between self and other: at the same time organic and digital. 

Yet cyborgs are forced to inherit the political structures of their fathers; “they are the illegitimate offspring of militarism and patriarchal capitalism, not to mention state socialism… but illegitimate offspring are often exceedingly unfaithful to their origins.” They remain situated in this ironic confrontation: the cyborg is just as concerned with the “final imposition of a grid of control on the planet, about the final abstraction embodied in a Star Wars apocalypse waged in the name of defense,” as they are with a social reality that no longer concerns itself with the boundaries between public and private, between human and human, between human and animal, between human and nature. 

This is the struggle in cybernetic politics; the one I will be exploring in the following posts. Just as the mass-produced written word spearheaded a violent political movement towards a textual, individualistic society with specific ontological and epistemic understandings of what it means to be a self, mass liberation of hypertext is driving a radical reformation of ontological and political structures to accommodate the unique needs and desires of the cyborgs: the social reality we are inheriting is one where the cyborgs are in a very real battle with their technocapitalist, textual fathers. How do cyborgs operate? What are the structures of this new social reality? Those are the kinds of questions that I’m hoping to begin to address here.