
I want to write about truth.  

I want to pretend that what’s to follow in the text rests upon a certain sense of absolution that I can deliver it as if the cosmos themselves conspired to pass it down from heaven above and delivered it through my fingers to be shared amongst the people of our world with an unquestioning certainty and a conviction that can only be reserved to the language of the cosmos themselves: that somehow, my predestined mission in life was to be in conversation with you now, and convince you that this: this, this is truth.  

I can’t do that.  

It’s not a failing of my feeble, psychotic mind. It’s not that I haven’t seen enough or read enough or thought enough or experienced enough or smoked enough weed or did enough psychedelics. (Trust me, I have.)  

Nor is it out of some emo, postmodern, nihilistic temptation to reject Reality-with-a-capital-R and Truth-with-a-capital-T and retreat back to my private left-wing university smugly grinning as I glance over my computer screen at my text: ha, I’ve got them now, as if standing behind some rhetorical wall: shielding myself from the slightest diversion into the world of the ordinary by steadfastly circlejerking the postmodern thinkers who this text, unfortunately, still manages to owe a great deal of credit to.  

No, I can’t write about truth for two reasons. The first is that frankly, I don’t give a damn about truth. I spent the first half of my formal education learning that 2+2=4 and the rest of it learning how to reject that 2+2=4. I read Plato, I read Nietzsche, I read Sarte, Kant, and Descartes. I have never found pinning down the absolute nature of reality to be a terribly interesting or fruitful project, and I’ll be damned if Aristotle is going to tell me that in order to be a truly great philosopher — literally, lover of wisdom — I must dissect and understand the causes of things in the world. I’m not interested in that project. Or, at least, I’m only interested in that project insofaras I’m interested in how us as humans come to knowledge about the world in the first place. The fancy academic word for this is “epistemology.”  

But more than that, I can’t write about truth — definitively, at least — because the thesis of this piece is based on a simple, alarmist, yet productive thesis: I believe that we are going through a fundamental, unstoppable, fantastic, important, largely uncriticized, and terribly misunderstood shift in how we as humans in our society come to knowledge about our world that demolishes the very structures that I would need to base any claims about truth on in the first place. That shift, as I will explore, is manifesting itself across all spheres of our sociopolitical understanding of the world; and is dismantling the very ways with which we can interpret our mediums and each other. Consider what follows as a bit of a knowingly ironic pre-post-mortem. A dissection of something that has not yet died using the very appendages of the undead.  

Don’t consider this piece alarmist. Don’t consider it pessimistic. Don’t consider it even terribly coherent. It can’t be coherent, at least in the traditional sense, because it is an exploration of those structures that ground our sense of coherency. As a text, it ironically is forced to use and abuse the structures of the old guard — the printed, written word — to discuss the age of the digital human. I’m absolutely aware of the difficulty of such a project, and the beast that consists of the nasty contradictions of this project will inevitably rear its head in from time to time. I’m going to welcome that beast with open arms, because fighting it would be an exercise in futility.  

I still, however, think and hope this project will be a useful one, for I’m not sure how else we can embark on a fruitful discussion of our new world without spending some time thinking about and dismantling these structures. The easiest way to do that — and, perhaps because I’m lazy or perhaps because I’m at a loss for how else to do it — is through discussing these structures first broadly; then exploring these structures as they appear across specific spheres of our daily lives — so that’s how this project is structured: part one is a deep dive into theory, while part two is a collection of thoughts — notes, really — on our new social reality. Through these discussions, I hope to generate a corpus of useful observations that will help both me and the reader come to better understand and interpret this new, post-human, cyborg, world. 